I want to show you a very slightly different way of explaining this Dzogchen. I thought it was just
a wonderful explanation.
Really? I thought that's enough. Really?
Dzogchen is, of course, a breath-wave. In Tibetan, it's known as Dzogwa Cimbu. Dzogwa Cimbu.
So Dzog, Pa, and Cimbu. There are three kind of works. What means Dzog? Dzog is the great master.
Of course, this is every year. All the teachings say that. That means everything is completed.
Everything is completed. What is everything?
All the samsara is completed within this. All the nirvana is complete within this.
And all the path, journey from the samsara to nirvana is complete.
How is that completed? It's not something that is completed in a big container and put everything
in a package of sauce.
Oh, kind of like all the toy bags. T-O-I, toy bags. These are children, big children, toy bags.
And put everything in a container. No. Not like that.
What that container is is dhamma-dhatu, pervasive, dhamma-dhatu, openness, beyond the limitation
and boundaries, pervasive.
That pervasive nature, everything is completed. How is it completed?
All that's completed, those objects, what everything is, samsara objects and nirvana objects,
application, path objects, are all inseparably completed.
The nature and each of the samsara, nirvana, path, that never separated from that.
It's inseparable state. That's how it's all complete. Everything in that state.
So everything, items that you see, we think, we perceive or hear, is never separated from that
great nature, pervasive nature, uncombounded nature.
It's really pervasive, pervasive, that nature.
So that is what's called completion. Completion or completion. So, in individual, so.
Then pamis, pamis, who is perceiving that, or where that all is completed?
That nature is not outside as object, or object, sorry, it's not outside, it's object.
It's within this, our own rupa, your rupa.
Our rupa is the perceiving that qualities and all that completed within our rupa.
Pa, zupa cemu, pa is rupa, you see. Everything is within the rupa, our own state.
Even though it looks so gigantic and so big in the water, but yet it is all complete within the rup
a and beholden by rupa and is emanated from the rupa.
It's a culturally union state. That's what in the teaching said in the Tibetan world, the union of
the wisdom and the spaces,
or union of the wisdom, or primordial wisdom, and dhamma dhatus, a totally union.
Rupa is a union of the wisdom, primordial wisdom, and the vastness and openness, natures, rupas.
And what is that also? In the Dokti teaching, that is known as the three kaya states.
Often said three kaya, the embodiment of three kaya, rupa, our own rupa.
Rupa is a Tibetan world and translated into any as awareness.
The pure awareness is the embodiment of the three kayas.
What are three kayas? Dhamma kaya, Sambokaya, and Nirmakaya.
The emptiness aspect of the rupa is dhamma kaya. The clarity, the weakness aspect of the rupa is
sambokaya.
And pervasive energy, radiating energy aspect of the rupa is Nirmakaya.
Yet that all seems that they are not three different things.
With this three kaya, that energy, that power is reflected externally according to Dokti teaching.
Then we see poem, song, space. It's all external. It's all reflection.
And what is the teaching here? All in the three kaya states is the rupa states.
The display of rupa, three kaya, is external. These are all qualities.
Poem, song, and space. Reality is display of our own rupa.
According to Dokti teaching, according generally in the Buddha teaching, not just from the Mahayana
teaching, clearly explained by the gracious kindness, wise teaching of the Buddha,
explained orally, so and so. And then this basic Dokti teaching has so many different names too.
Dokti, for example, in the Mahayana service, obtained this name as dathanga dandagas.
Dathanga dandagas, which translated into English, can be Buddha-natural.
Buddha-natural, dathanga dandagas.
Then in the dandagas, for example, in the human schools, dandagas in the Dokti level,
Dokti level in the mind-only certain teachings, kind of more emphasizing this, this, to the planet,
this, this nature.
As bodhijas, absolute bodhijas, bodhijas, just bodhijas, that's what we call the king of creation,
bodhijas.
The people's dandagas, king of creation, bodhijas.
And in the mind section of the Dokti teaching, the space of the phenomena, the empty of the
phenomena.
In the Dokti teaching, many times they referred terminology used, sub-born customs.
Many also had other teachings, teachings about all in the mind, all in the unobscured, uncontracted
, all in the mind.
Those are the terminology used in the different levels of the Dokti teachings.
But referring the same thing. And this, generally this teaching, this, generally this Buddha nature
teaching is a very pure teaching.
A great community, I told, let me have a history of that.
Then we study also, kind of like the activity or understanding of this.
So I told that.